keśapāśadhṛtapiñchikāvitatisañcalanmakarakuṇḍalaṃ
hārajālavanamālikālalitamaṅgarāgaghanasaurabham |
pītaceladhṛtakāñcikāñcitamudañcadaṃśumaṇinūpuraṃ
rāsakeliparibhūṣitaṃ tava hi rūpamīśa kalayāmahe ||1||
keśa-pāśa-dhṛta-	the beautiful lock of hair fixed
piñchikā-vitati-	by a bunch of peacock feathers
sañcalan-	dangling
makara-kuṇḍalam	fish shaped earrings
hāra-jāla-	many beautiful necklaces and garlands
vana-mālikā-lalitam-	of flowers adorning (the neck)
aṅga-rāga-ghana-saurabham	the body smeared with sandal paste and other unguents emitting strong fragrance
pīta-cela	the yellow silk garment
dhṛta-kāñcikā-añcitam-	fastened by the golden girdle adorning (the waist)
udañcat-aṃśu-	flashing forth rays
maṇi-nūpuram	gem studded anklets
rāsa-keli-	the Raas Dance
paribhūṣitam	adornments
tava hi	Thy indeed
rūpam-īśa	the lustrous form, O Lord!
kalayāmahe	(we) meditate upon
A bunch of peacock feathers adorning the beautiful locks of hair; a pair of fish shaped earrings dangling from the ears; many necklaces intermingled with flower garlands adorning the neck; a golden girdle fastened to the yellow silk garment adorning the waist; sandal paste and other unguents smeared on the body emitting strong fragrance; gem studded anklets flashing forth a glow; on such a radiant form of Thee, with decorations appropriate for the Raasa, we meditate on.
tāvadeva kṛtamaṇḍane kalitakañculīkakucamaṇḍale
gaṇḍalolamaṇikuṇḍale yuvatimaṇḍale'tha parimaṇḍale |
antarā sakalasundarīyugalamindirāramaṇa sañcaran
mañjulāṃ tadanu rāsakelimayi kañjanābha samupādadhā: ||2||
tāvat-eva	then only
kṛta-maṇḍane	having done the makeup
kalita-kañculīka-	and put on the bodice
kuca-maṇḍale	on the breasts
gaṇḍa-lola	dangling on the cheeks
maṇi-kuṇḍale	the begemmed earrings
yuvati-maṇḍale-	the group of young women
atha parimaṇḍale	then forming a circle
antarā	in between
sakala-sundarī-	all the beautiful women
yugalam-	every two of them
indirā-ramaṇa	O Thou Consort of Laxmi!
sañcaran	moving about
mañjulāṃ tadanu	the beautiful, then
rāsakelim-ayi	the Raas Dance O Thou
kañjanābha	Padmanaabha
samupādadhā:	performed
Then only, having done the make up and putting on the bodice on the breasts, and begemmed earrings dangling on the cheeks, the group of young women formed a circle surrounding Thee. O Consort of Laxmi! O Padmanaabha! Thou moved about in between every two of the beautiful women and performed the very beautiful Raas Dance.
vāsudeva tava bhāsamānamiha rāsakelirasasaurabhaṃ
dūrato'pi khalu nāradāgaditamākalayya kutukākulā |
veṣabhūṣaṇavilāsapeśalavilāsinīśatasamāvṛtā
nākato yugapadāgatā viyati vegato'tha suramaṇḍalī ||3||
vāsudeva tava	O Vaasudeva Thy
bhāsamānam-iha	resplendent here
rāsa-keli-rasasaurabham	Raasa Leelaa's resplendent and fragrant beauty
dūrata:-api khalu	from far also indeed
nārada-āgaditam-	as Naarada described
ākalayya	having heard
kutuka-ākulā	(and so) filled with eagerness
veṣa-bhūṣaṇa-vilāsa-peśala-	in dressing up with jewellery and in amorous display, experts
vilāsinī-śata-samāvṛtā	beautiful women in hundreds surrounded
nākata:	from the heaven
yugapat-āgatā	all together came
viyati vegata:-	to the sky very fast
atha sura-maṇḍalī	then the gods in groups
O Vaasudeva! Naarada described Thy resplendent, fragrant and beautiful Raas Leelaa. Hearing about it from far, groups of gods, full of eagerness came from the heaven and quickly gathered in the sky. They were accompanied by hundreds of beautiful women who were experts in dressing up and in adorning themselves with jewellery and also in amorous display.
veṇunādakṛtatānadānakalagānarāgagatiyojanā-
lobhanīyamṛdupādapātakṛtatālamelanamanoharam |
pāṇisaṃkvaṇitakaṅkaṇaṃ ca muhuraṃsalambitakarāmbujaṃ
śroṇibimbacaladambaraṃ bhajata rāsakelirasaḍambaram ||4||
veṇu-nāda-	the flute's key note
kṛta-tāna-	setting the tune
dāna-kala-	giving the sweet
gāna-rāga-	song (and) raagas
gati-yojanā-	flow and rhythm
lobhanīya-	the enchanting
mṛdu-pāda-pāta-kṛta-	soft foot beat making
tāla-melana-	(the keeping of) the beats
manoharam	very pleasant
pāṇi-saṃkvaṇita-	hands clapping
kaṅkaṇam ca	and (mingled with the) sound of bangles
muhu:-aṃsa-lambita-	again and again on the shoulders (of the Gopikaas) placed
kara-ambujaṃ	hands like lotuses
śroṇi-bimba-	on the waist
calat-ambaram	fluttering of clothing
bhajata rāsakeli-	meditate on the Raas Dance
rasa-ḍambaram	(with its) enthralling majesty
The key notes of the flute set the tune giving the sweet song and the raagas a flow and rhythm. The soft beat of the feet of the dancers kept time with the very pleasant beats of the music. The clapping of the hands mingled with the tingling sound of the bangles. During the dance, time and again Thou placed Thy lotus hands on the shoulders of the Gopikaas. As they danced about, the clothings on their waists fluttered. On such enthralling majesty of the Raas Dance let us meditate.
spardhayā viracitānugānakṛtatāratāramadhurasvare
nartane'tha lalitāṅgahāralulitāṅgahāramaṇibhūṣaṇe |
sammadena kṛtapuṣpavarṣamalamunmiṣaddiviṣadāṃ kulaṃ
cinmaye tvayi nilīyamānamiva sammumoha savadhūkulam ||5||
spardhayā viracita-	(as if )in competition performing
anugāna-kṛta-	the singing one after the other (and) producing
tāra-tāra-	very loud
madhura-svare	beautiful strains
nartane-atha	(and) while dancing, then
lalita-aṅga-hāra-	the beautiful limbs captivatingly (moving)
lulita-aṅga-hāra-	displacing on the neck and body the necklaces
maṇi-bhūṣaṇe	and begemmed ornaments
sammadena	with extreme joy
kṛta-puṣpa-varṣam-	doing flower showering
alam-unmiṣat-	not batting the eyes
diviṣadāṃ kulaṃ	the gods in groups
cinmaye tvayi	in the Pure Consciousness, i.e., in Thee
nilīyamānam-iva	completely submerged as if
sammumoha	and were entranced
savadhūkulam	along with their women-folk
As though in competition, the singers raised their voices in successive strains as the musical notes reached higher in pitch. The beautiful limbs of the dancers moved delightfully displacing their necklaces and the begemmed ornaments on their body. The groups of gods watched with extreme joy and showered rains of flowers. Along with their women-folk they watched entranced completely submerged in the Pure Consciousness i.e. in Thee.
svinnasannatanuvallarī tadanu kāpi nāma paśupāṅganā
kāntamaṃsamavalambate sma tava tāntibhāramukulekṣaṇā ||
kācidācalitakuntalā navapaṭīrasāraghanasaurabhaṃ
vañcanena tava sañcucumba bhujamañcitorupulakāṅkurā ||6||
svinna-sanna-	sweating (and) tired
tanu-vallarī	with a body like a creeper
tadanu kāpi nāma	there after some(one) indeed
paśupāṅganā	Gopikaa
kāntam-aṃsam-	on the beautiful shoulders (of Thee)
avalambate sma	supported herself
tava tānti-bhāra-	of Thee, (because of) the exhaustion weight
mukula-īkṣaṇā	(making) half closed (her) eyes
kācit-	another woman
ācalita-kuntalā	with dishevelled hair
nava-paṭīra-sāra-ghana-saurabham	the fresh sandal paste's intense fragrance
vañcanena tava	slyly ( to smell) on Thy (arm)
sañcucumba bhujam-	kissed the arm
añcita-uru-	sprouting big
pulaka-aṅkurā	ecstatic horripilation
One Gopikaa, slender and delicate like a creeper, tired and sweating, with drooping eyes out of fatigue, supported herself on Thy beautiful shoulder. Another woman with dishevelled hair, to smell the fragrance of the fresh sandal paste on Thy arm, slyly kissed Thy arm, having horripilation over her body in the process.
kāpi gaṇḍabhuvi sannidhāya nijagaṇḍamākulitakuṇḍalaṃ
puṇyapūranidhiranvavāpa tava pūgacarvitarasāmṛtam |
indirāvihṛtimandiraṃ bhuvanasundaraṃ hi naṭanāntare
tvāmavāpya dadhuraṅganā: kimu na sammadonmadadaśāntaram ||7||
kāpi gaṇḍabhuvi	another one on the cheek area (of Thee)
sannidhāya nija gaṇḍam-	placing her own cheek
ākulita-kuṇḍalam-	(with) dangling earrings
puṇya-pūra nidhi:-	(she who was) of merits a full repository
anvavāpa	intook
tava-pūga-carvita-	Thy betel chewed
rasa-amṛtam	juice nectar like
indirā-vihṛti-mandiram	Laxmi's sporting field
bhuvana-sundaram	the most beautiful in all the worlds
hi naṭana-antare	indeed during the dance
tvām-avāpya	Thee achieving
dadhu:-aṅganā:	attained the Gopikaas
kimu na sammada-	what not joyous
unmada-daśāntaram	intoxication states
Another one, who was a repository of merits, placed her own cheek on Thy cheek, with earrings dangling on them. She enjoyed the thrill as she intook the nectar like juice from the betel chewed by Thee. The Gopikaas, during the dance, having achieved Laxmi's sport field, Thee, the most beautiful in all the worlds, what states of joyous intoxication did they not attain?
gānamīśa virataṃ krameṇa kila vādyamelanamupārataṃ
brahmasammadarasākulā: sadasi kevalaṃ nanṛturaṅganā: |
nāvidannapi ca nīvikāṃ kimapi kuntalīmapi ca kañculīṃ
jyotiṣāmapi kadambakaṃ divi vilambitaṃ kimaparaṃ bruve ||8||
gānam-īśa	the song O Lord
virataṃ krameṇa	stopped gradually
kila vādya-melanam-	indeed the musical instruments
upārataṃ	ceased
brahma-sammada-	(in) the Brahmic bliss
rasa-ākulā:	(and) joy deeply immersed
sadasi kevalaṃ	in a circle only
nanṛtu:-aṅganā:	kept dancing the women
na-avidan-api ca	and not knowing also
nīvikāṃ kimapi	of the knot of the string (loosening) anything also
kuntalīm-api	of the hair (dishevelled)
ca kañculīm	and of the bodice
jyotiṣām-api	of the stars also
kadambakaṃ	in their courses
divi vilambitaṃ	in the sky stood still
kim-aparaṃ bruve	what more than this should I say
O Lord! The singing stopped gradually and the musical instruments also ceased. But immersed deeply in the joy of Brahmic Bliss the women kept dancing in a circle. They were not even aware of the knot of clothing strings loosening or of their bodice having slipped or of their hair being dishevelled. The stars in the sky stood still in their courses, to enjoy all this. What more can I say?
modasīmni bhuvanaṃ vilāpya vihṛtiṃ samāpya ca tato vibho
kelisammṛditanirmalāṅganavagharmaleśasubhagātmanām |
manmathāsahanacetasāṃ paśupayoṣitāṃ sukṛtacodita-
stāvadākalitamūrtirādadhitha māravīraparamotsavān ||9||
modasīmni	in the highest bliss
bhuvanaṃ vilāpya	the world engulfing
vihṛtiṃ samāpya ca	and the sport (dance) ending
tata: vibho	then O Lord!
keli-sammṛdita-	the sport pressing (exerting)
nirmala-aṅga-	the clean limbs
nava-gharma-leśa-	fresh perspiration drops
subhaga-ātmanām	on the beautiful bodied women
manmatha-asahana-	the Cupid's shafts not being able to bear
cetasāṃ	(with) such minds
paṣupa-yoṣitāṃ	of the cowherd women
sukṛta-codita:-	prompted by their meritorious deeds
tāvat-ākalita-mūrti:-	then assuming forms
adadhitha	(Thou) performed
māravīra-parama-	an amorously great
utsavān	festivity
The world was engulfed in the highest bliss as the Raas Dance ended. The pure bodies of these women glowed with fresh perspiration drops caused by the dance, and who were unable to bear the shafts of Cupid any longer. O Lord! Prompted by the meritorious deeds of the Gopikaas, Thou assumed as many forms as they were in number and performed an amorously great festivity.
kelibhedaparilolitābhiratilālitābhirabalālibhi:
svairamīśa nanu sūrajāpayasi cārunāma vihṛtiṃ vyadhā: |
kānane'pi ca visāriśītalakiśoramārutamanohare
sūnasaurabhamaye vilesitha vilāsinīśatavimohanam ||10||
keli-bheda-	by sports varied
parilolitābhi:-	(who were) exhausted
ati-lālitābhi:-	(and were) fondly caressed
abalālibhi:	with those women
svairam-īśa	at will O Lord!
nanu sūrajā-payasi	indeed (Thou) in the Yamunaa waters
cāru-nām	beautifully indeed
vihṛtiṃ vyadhā:	sports performed
kānane-api ca	(and) in the forests also and
visāri-śītala-	(where) spreading cool,
kiśora-māruta-	gentle breeze
manohare	(was) enchanting
sūna-saurabhamaye	(filled with) the flower fragrance
vilesitha	(Thou) went around
vilāsinī-śata-	(with) the women in large numbers
vimohanam	dazing them
O Lord! The women were exhausted by the varied sports and were fondly caressed. Thou performed sports with them at will in the waters of Yamunaa.Thou also went around in the forests where a cool gentle breeze was blowing filled with the fragrance of flowers, which dazed the large number of women with ecstatic joy.
kāminīriti hi yāminīṣu khalu kāmanīyakanidhe bhavān
pūrṇasammadarasārṇavaṃ kamapi yogigamyamanubhāvayan |
brahmaśaṅkaramukhānapīha paśupāṅganāsu bahumānayan
bhaktalokagamanīyarūpa kamanīya kṛṣṇa paripāhi mām ||11||
kāminī:-iti hi	the women in this manner
yāminīṣu khalu	in the nights indeed
kāmanīyakanidhe	O repository of all virtues!
bhavān	Thou
pūrṇa-sammada-	the immense bliss
rasa-arṇavaṃ	nectar ocean
kamapi	who so ever
yogi-gamyam-	yogi (may) attain
anubhāvayan	making (them, the women) experience
brahma-śaṅkara-mukhān-	in Brahmaa Shiva and other gods
api-ih	even, here
paśupa-aṅganāsu	in (these) Gopikaas
bahumānayan	placing respect
bhakta-loka-	to the devout people
gamanīya-rūpa	attainable, of such nature
kamanīya kṛṣṇa	O Attractive One! O Krishna!
paripāhi mām	protect me
O Repository of all virtues! In this manner, Thou made the women experience the immense bliss of the nectar ocean in the nights. Such an experience only yogis may attain. This created in Brahma Shiva and other gods a feeling of respect for the Gopikaas. O Thou attainable to the devout people, of such a nature, O Attractive One! O Krishna! protect me.